README.md, before:

gis
===

GIS stuff, play with openstreetmap, U.S. census, data.seattle.gov data.

Tools
=====

easy_install Rtree

Source Census Data
==================

http://bmander.com/dotmap/methods.html

    for i in `seq -w 1 56`; do wget ftp://ftp2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER2010BLKPOPHU/tabblock2010_${i}_pophu.zip; done

TBD - host all the same data in a google drive and link to it here

The FIPS code link on the dotmap page is dead, so look to wikipedia:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_FIPS_region_codes_(S%E2%80%93U)#US:_United_States

US53 is Washington State.


https://gist.github.com/anonymous/4385412

    sudo apt-get install python-gdal 
    
~~python-shapely~~


2013 or 2014 Census updates?
----------------------------

https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/tiger-line.html

Housing Data
------------

Per-tract info on housing units in multi-unit structures vs. single-family-housing?

http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/meta/long_HSG096212.htm

Economic
--------

American Community Survey?

http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_5yr/summaryfile/2008-2012_ACSSF_By_State_All_Tables/

http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_5yr/summaryfile/2008-2012_ACSSF_By_State_All_Tables/Washington_All_Geographies_Tracts_Block_Groups_Only.zip

What is difference with 'not tract' version?

Lots of warnings on opendata stack about complexity, statistical inaccuracy.

Tables are unlabeled.

http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_5yr/summaryfile/UserTools/ACS_2008-2012_SF_Tech_Doc.pdf

The e prefix is for estimate, the m is for margin of error.

Here is an example file

e20125wa0059000.txt 

This is sequence number 0059

Inside the file is a set of long lines, here is one:

ACSSF 201200000 wa  0 59  1 2619995 130819  23551 10544 11151 10766 10056 10422 7834  7573  5916  9527  10258 8051  3180  807 791 392 926139  44349 27841 30469 36923 37541 43490 42770 44774 40626 79924 111635  145771  95680 54006 49756 40584 1037531 58273 33877 31343 34334 35003 39795 36911 41291 37694 81315 110721  152267  117833  77681 78888 70305 525506  32948 39653 40541 39784 37736 34185 31293 28963 26569 45041 50586 50395 26015 14993 13660 13144 2186137 98755 15786 8437  8436  8199  7819  7990  5758  5663  4680  7431  8401  6290  2277  748 555 285 719456  31345 18965 20775 26448 27463 32016 32196 33830 31212 63742 90225 117884  77718 43950 39472 32215 887415  45577 27607 25014 27991 28786 33069 30470 34615 31502 68823 95753 132910  103038  68330 70544 63386 480511  26179 34797 36652 36643 35156 31949 29151 26821 24865 41857 47249 46715 23701 13920 12575 12281 88888 5320  1321  244 519 462 514 553 343 331 205 253 171 321 61  0 2 20  38623 3831  2490  2331  2952  2792  2727  2026  2593  1809  3004  3445  4307  2024  927 911 454 34907 3985  2293  1628  1669  1332  1871  1602  1819  1567  2703  3256  4511  2969  1713  1270  719 10038 1368  1126  1003  611 559 505 521 480 302 747 802 713 600 185 276 240

The columns range from 'A' to 'HE', which is  'H'*26 + 'E' = 7*26 + 4 = 186
False leads (insufficient resolution):

1yr vs. 3 vs 5yr?
http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_1yr/pums/

files http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_1yr/pums/csv_hwa.zip and http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_1yr/pums/unix_pwa.zip are for Washington State.

Data is in sas7bdat format, what is that?

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/sas7bdat

Don't bother with install, just export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:. and then run the convert to csv script from the same dir:

:~/other/sas7bdat-0.2.2$ ./scripts/sas7bdat_to_csv ~/own/gis/acs/psam_h53.sas7bdat 
[psam_h53.csv] wrote 32149 of 32149 lines

The data has a few samples of income per PUMA Public Use Microdata Area "PUMAs are special non-overlapping areas that partition each state into contiguous geographic units containing no fewer than 100,000 people each"

Need to get PUMA shapefiles.  

But what about tract level data?

BG is for block group:
ftp://ftp2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER_DP/2011ACS/2011_ACS_5YR_BG_53.gdb.zip

Seattle Data
============

City Council Districts
----------------------

These list census tracts:
http://clerk.seattle.gov/~public/charter/charter.htm#articleIV

http://www.seattledistrictsnow.org/files/view-only_petition.pdf

The census shape file has TRACTCE10, which is the same as the tract numbers in the charter with two decimal places- 97.02 is 009702. 

The charter also mentions block groups, which appear the same as BLOCKCE.  Perhaps some of the tracts span the border with neighboring cities, so the blocks are called out.  

It should be easy to make list of all the tracts and block numbers where provided in an ipython notebook, then plot them and have a data structure that organizes all the census data by council district.

How to do joins that will meld all the tracts together- buffer + cascaded_union in Shapely?

### Verification 

Get a shapefile of the Seattle boundary and make sure the edges of the districts are within it.
https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/Seattle-City-Limits/veex-tfda

#### Missing & Erroneous tracts

So far it looks like the amendment missed tracts in District 2: 110.02 and 111.01

Also 260.01 block 1008 is outside the Seattle boundary.

Block Group 1 of Tract 17 should be 17.01

### Export to shapefile, kml?

Use fiona, though no ubuntu package:
https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Fiona

So install python-pip and then pip-install fiona
also need descartes

Buildings
---------

2009 building outlines:

https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/2009-Building-Outlines/y7u8-vad7

Use qgis to inspect data

Ideally all the buildings would be associated with their census blocks- a data structure would have 2-way links, a census block would have a list of all buildings included, and a the buildings would link to their census block.  A rough estimate of occupants per building could be made for visualization purposes.

Parks 
-----

A good first pass would be to subtract parks out of census blocks that include them, and get the population density correct for the remaining area rather than diluting it with park land.

https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/City-Of-Seattle-Parks/kxj9-se6t

Zoning
------

Zoning- can see a map on this page, but no shp boundaries?

https://data.seattle.gov/Land-Base/DPD-ZONING/r6xd-5qab

Use this for zoning instead:
https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/City-Of-Seattle-Zoning/2hat-teay

Look at zoning breakdown of each district, total area of each zoning type in all of Seattle.

Street Network
--------------

Network of streets, no widths just 'artclass' (arterial class).

Pavement
--------

Pretty old (1999), but better than nothing.  Want to be able to figure out street widths.

https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/Pavement-Edge/zbph-53dz

Parking
-------

Haven't found this dataset yet- street parking, zone permit areas.

https://data.seattle.gov/Transportation/No-parking-data/aua5-7y43

Traffic Volume
--------------

Spreadsheet sent to me by SDOT, get an updated one regularly, try to get them to post it to data.seattle.gov?

Spreadsheet references 

Traffic Signals
---------------

https://data.seattle.gov/Transportation/Traffic-Signals/dr6d-ejex

Traffic Circles
---------------

https://data.seattle.gov/Transportation/Traffic-Circles/g6i5-ix4z

Usage
=====

ipython (1.2.1) 

ipython notebook --pylab inline

Edit parameter values, run all, should get png in current directory.  

old python only script:
    python census_shp.py ~/own/gis/census/*53_pophu.shp pop_density_wa.png output.png


Street Network
==============

How to implement a graph in python?

Each street item as an F_INTR_ID and a S_INTR_ID - the start and finish intersections

Combining network with pavement
-------------------------------

Need to create a graph of adjacent pavement sections, associate network segments inbetween them.

Want to get average width of each network segment, and approximate radius of each intersection.

King County
===========

data.kingcounty.gov

http://www5.kingcounty.gov/gisdataportal/Default.aspx

Parcels
-------

property_SHP.zip

ftp://ftp.kingcounty.gov/gis/Web/GISData/property_SHP.zip

Found via http://www5.kingcounty.gov/gisdataportal/Default.aspx

The best information is in this shapfile:

parcel_address.shp

The amount of data is very large, filter on POSTALCYTN = SEATTLE or CTYNAME = Seattle - no these don't include everything, try LEVY_JURIS=SEATTLE (more complete but still not all) or KCTP_CTYST=SEATTLE WA (also not complete).  What about zip codes?  Also not complete.  

A boolean combination may be best, in qgis Select By Expression: ( "POSTALCTYN" = 'SEATTLE')  +  ("CTYNAME" = 'Seattle' ) +  "LEVY_JURIS"= 'SEATTLE' + "KCTP_CTYST"='SEATTLE'( "POSTALCTYN" = 'SEATTLE')  +  ("CTYNAME" = 'Seattle' ) +  "LEVY_JURIS"= 'SEATTLE' + "KCTP_CTYST"='SEATTLE' + ("JURIS" = 'SE') (this still isn't working in qgis)

Maybe just boundary clipping.

The 'PRESENTUSE' field looks very interesting.

Ought to make a geojson that has all that information plus census information and population density.  Some info in the parcels could be used to determine that chunks of census blocks are unoccupied (because the taxes are zero?  Is that a safe assumption), and that the real density is higher.  

Need to calculate area of all parcels within a census block (and are there any parcels that cross census block boundaries?), and then assume population is distributed among them.  
The densities will be higher since streets are excluded, which is fine.
It's okay for densities to include more unused areas at higher levels, because those areas ought to be factored in.

Even without integrating census data a simple colorized map of property size or property values would be useful.

Need to convert the units to lat long.

" Planar coordinates are encoded using coordinate pair
Abscissae (x-coordinates) are specified to the nearest 0.0005
Ordinates (y-coordinates) are specified to the nearest 0.0005
Planar coordinates are specified in Foot_US

The horizontal datum used is D North American 1983 HARN.
The ellipsoid used is GRS 1980.
The semi-major axis of the ellipsoid used is 6378137.0.
The flattening of the ellipsoid used is 1/298.257222101."


Prop 1 vs. parcel size would be interesting.


King County Voting Districts/Precincts
======================================

https://data.kingcounty.gov/Places-Boundaries/Voting-Districts-of-King-County/4eex-7357

These have shape_areas, presumably these are square meters?

Problems with ipython crashing when trying to get points- Ipython dies with no error, but trying to duplicate in regular python leads to::

  >>> geom= feat.GetGeometryRef()
  >>> geom
  <osgeo.ogr.Geometry; proxy of <Swig Object of type 'OGRGeometryShadow *' at 0x7fc5103c2e10> >
  >>> pts = geom.GetPoints()
  ERROR 6: Incompatible geometry for operation

So far I've discovered some geoms like in the street network can directly provide points with GetPoints(), while others in the census and voting district shape files require::
 
  >>> ch = geom.ConvexHull()
  >>> bd = ch.GetBoundary()
  >>> pts = bd.GetPoints()
  >>> pts
  [(1347198.0200866014, 257822.7410414368), (1347169.633004278, 257894.8399786055), (1347151.2829753608, 257941.446840778),...

Unfortunately this is just the points of the convex hull, which worked okay for rectangular census blocks but not complex voting districts.  So skip the convex hull part, and do bd = geom.GetBoundary- this works.

What are units of precinct boundaries?  They aren't lat/long- it's feet with reference to 'harn 1983' etc.

Precinct Graph
--------------

Find shared edges between precincts and make a graph connecting them all.  Find permutations of precincts that would result in >50% approval, but don't break the graph.  Designate one downtown precinct to be the center and make sure remaining precincts connect to it.

Commit message:

Tried out convertin the us feet shapefile to geojson, the feet coordinates were preserved- try to specify the conversion units next.

README.md, after:

gis
===

GIS stuff, play with openstreetmap, U.S. census, data.seattle.gov data.

Tools
=====

easy_install Rtree

Source Census Data
==================

http://bmander.com/dotmap/methods.html

    for i in `seq -w 1 56`; do wget ftp://ftp2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER2010BLKPOPHU/tabblock2010_${i}_pophu.zip; done

TBD - host all the same data in a google drive and link to it here

The FIPS code link on the dotmap page is dead, so look to wikipedia:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_FIPS_region_codes_(S%E2%80%93U)#US:_United_States

US53 is Washington State.


https://gist.github.com/anonymous/4385412

    sudo apt-get install python-gdal 
    
~~python-shapely~~


2013 or 2014 Census updates?
----------------------------

https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/tiger-line.html

Housing Data
------------

Per-tract info on housing units in multi-unit structures vs. single-family-housing?

http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/meta/long_HSG096212.htm

Economic
--------

American Community Survey?

http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_5yr/summaryfile/2008-2012_ACSSF_By_State_All_Tables/

http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_5yr/summaryfile/2008-2012_ACSSF_By_State_All_Tables/Washington_All_Geographies_Tracts_Block_Groups_Only.zip

What is difference with 'not tract' version?

Lots of warnings on opendata stack about complexity, statistical inaccuracy.

Tables are unlabeled.

http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_5yr/summaryfile/UserTools/ACS_2008-2012_SF_Tech_Doc.pdf

The e prefix is for estimate, the m is for margin of error.

Here is an example file

e20125wa0059000.txt 

This is sequence number 0059

Inside the file is a set of long lines, here is one:

ACSSF 201200000 wa  0 59  1 2619995 130819  23551 10544 11151 10766 10056 10422 7834  7573  5916  9527  10258 8051  3180  807 791 392 926139  44349 27841 30469 36923 37541 43490 42770 44774 40626 79924 111635  145771  95680 54006 49756 40584 1037531 58273 33877 31343 34334 35003 39795 36911 41291 37694 81315 110721  152267  117833  77681 78888 70305 525506  32948 39653 40541 39784 37736 34185 31293 28963 26569 45041 50586 50395 26015 14993 13660 13144 2186137 98755 15786 8437  8436  8199  7819  7990  5758  5663  4680  7431  8401  6290  2277  748 555 285 719456  31345 18965 20775 26448 27463 32016 32196 33830 31212 63742 90225 117884  77718 43950 39472 32215 887415  45577 27607 25014 27991 28786 33069 30470 34615 31502 68823 95753 132910  103038  68330 70544 63386 480511  26179 34797 36652 36643 35156 31949 29151 26821 24865 41857 47249 46715 23701 13920 12575 12281 88888 5320  1321  244 519 462 514 553 343 331 205 253 171 321 61  0 2 20  38623 3831  2490  2331  2952  2792  2727  2026  2593  1809  3004  3445  4307  2024  927 911 454 34907 3985  2293  1628  1669  1332  1871  1602  1819  1567  2703  3256  4511  2969  1713  1270  719 10038 1368  1126  1003  611 559 505 521 480 302 747 802 713 600 185 276 240

The columns range from 'A' to 'HE', which is  'H'*26 + 'E' = 7*26 + 4 = 186
False leads (insufficient resolution):

1yr vs. 3 vs 5yr?
http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_1yr/pums/

files http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_1yr/pums/csv_hwa.zip and http://www2.census.gov/acs2012_1yr/pums/unix_pwa.zip are for Washington State.

Data is in sas7bdat format, what is that?

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/sas7bdat

Don't bother with install, just export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:. and then run the convert to csv script from the same dir:

:~/other/sas7bdat-0.2.2$ ./scripts/sas7bdat_to_csv ~/own/gis/acs/psam_h53.sas7bdat 
[psam_h53.csv] wrote 32149 of 32149 lines

The data has a few samples of income per PUMA Public Use Microdata Area "PUMAs are special non-overlapping areas that partition each state into contiguous geographic units containing no fewer than 100,000 people each"

Need to get PUMA shapefiles.  

But what about tract level data?

BG is for block group:
ftp://ftp2.census.gov/geo/tiger/TIGER_DP/2011ACS/2011_ACS_5YR_BG_53.gdb.zip

Seattle Data
============

City Council Districts
----------------------

These list census tracts:
http://clerk.seattle.gov/~public/charter/charter.htm#articleIV

http://www.seattledistrictsnow.org/files/view-only_petition.pdf

The census shape file has TRACTCE10, which is the same as the tract numbers in the charter with two decimal places- 97.02 is 009702. 

The charter also mentions block groups, which appear the same as BLOCKCE.  Perhaps some of the tracts span the border with neighboring cities, so the blocks are called out.  

It should be easy to make list of all the tracts and block numbers where provided in an ipython notebook, then plot them and have a data structure that organizes all the census data by council district.

How to do joins that will meld all the tracts together- buffer + cascaded_union in Shapely?

### Verification 

Get a shapefile of the Seattle boundary and make sure the edges of the districts are within it.
https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/Seattle-City-Limits/veex-tfda

#### Missing & Erroneous tracts

So far it looks like the amendment missed tracts in District 2: 110.02 and 111.01

Also 260.01 block 1008 is outside the Seattle boundary.

Block Group 1 of Tract 17 should be 17.01

### Export to shapefile, kml?

Use fiona, though no ubuntu package:
https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Fiona

So install python-pip and then pip-install fiona
also need descartes

Buildings
---------

2009 building outlines:

https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/2009-Building-Outlines/y7u8-vad7

Use qgis to inspect data

Ideally all the buildings would be associated with their census blocks- a data structure would have 2-way links, a census block would have a list of all buildings included, and a the buildings would link to their census block.  A rough estimate of occupants per building could be made for visualization purposes.

Parks 
-----

A good first pass would be to subtract parks out of census blocks that include them, and get the population density correct for the remaining area rather than diluting it with park land.

https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/City-Of-Seattle-Parks/kxj9-se6t

Zoning
------

Zoning- can see a map on this page, but no shp boundaries?

https://data.seattle.gov/Land-Base/DPD-ZONING/r6xd-5qab

Use this for zoning instead:
https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/City-Of-Seattle-Zoning/2hat-teay

Look at zoning breakdown of each district, total area of each zoning type in all of Seattle.

Street Network
--------------

Network of streets, no widths just 'artclass' (arterial class).

Pavement
--------

Pretty old (1999), but better than nothing.  Want to be able to figure out street widths.

https://data.seattle.gov/dataset/Pavement-Edge/zbph-53dz

Parking
-------

Haven't found this dataset yet- street parking, zone permit areas.

https://data.seattle.gov/Transportation/No-parking-data/aua5-7y43

Traffic Volume
--------------

Spreadsheet sent to me by SDOT, get an updated one regularly, try to get them to post it to data.seattle.gov?

Spreadsheet references 

Traffic Signals
---------------

https://data.seattle.gov/Transportation/Traffic-Signals/dr6d-ejex

Traffic Circles
---------------

https://data.seattle.gov/Transportation/Traffic-Circles/g6i5-ix4z

Usage
=====

ipython (1.2.1) 

ipython notebook --pylab inline

Edit parameter values, run all, should get png in current directory.  

old python only script:
    python census_shp.py ~/own/gis/census/*53_pophu.shp pop_density_wa.png output.png


Street Network
==============

How to implement a graph in python?

Each street item as an F_INTR_ID and a S_INTR_ID - the start and finish intersections

Combining network with pavement
-------------------------------

Need to create a graph of adjacent pavement sections, associate network segments inbetween them.

Want to get average width of each network segment, and approximate radius of each intersection.

King County
===========

data.kingcounty.gov

http://www5.kingcounty.gov/gisdataportal/Default.aspx

Parcels
-------

property_SHP.zip

ftp://ftp.kingcounty.gov/gis/Web/GISData/property_SHP.zip

Found via http://www5.kingcounty.gov/gisdataportal/Default.aspx

The best information is in this shapfile:

parcel_address.shp

The amount of data is very large, filter on POSTALCYTN = SEATTLE or CTYNAME = Seattle - no these don't include everything, try LEVY_JURIS=SEATTLE (more complete but still not all) or KCTP_CTYST=SEATTLE WA (also not complete).  What about zip codes?  Also not complete.  

A boolean combination may be best, in qgis Select By Expression: ( "POSTALCTYN" = 'SEATTLE')  +  ("CTYNAME" = 'Seattle' ) +  "LEVY_JURIS"= 'SEATTLE' + "KCTP_CTYST"='SEATTLE'( "POSTALCTYN" = 'SEATTLE')  +  ("CTYNAME" = 'Seattle' ) +  "LEVY_JURIS"= 'SEATTLE' + "KCTP_CTYST"='SEATTLE' + ("JURIS" = 'SE') (this still isn't working in qgis)

Maybe just boundary clipping.

The 'PRESENTUSE' field looks very interesting.

Ought to make a geojson that has all that information plus census information and population density.  Some info in the parcels could be used to determine that chunks of census blocks are unoccupied (because the taxes are zero?  Is that a safe assumption), and that the real density is higher.  

Need to calculate area of all parcels within a census block (and are there any parcels that cross census block boundaries?), and then assume population is distributed among them.  
The densities will be higher since streets are excluded, which is fine.
It's okay for densities to include more unused areas at higher levels, because those areas ought to be factored in.

Even without integrating census data a simple colorized map of property size or property values would be useful.

Need to convert the units to lat long.

" Planar coordinates are encoded using coordinate pair
Abscissae (x-coordinates) are specified to the nearest 0.0005
Ordinates (y-coordinates) are specified to the nearest 0.0005
Planar coordinates are specified in Foot_US

The horizontal datum used is D North American 1983 HARN.
The ellipsoid used is GRS 1980.
The semi-major axis of the ellipsoid used is 6378137.0.
The flattening of the ellipsoid used is 1/298.257222101."

Convert to EPSG:4326 - WGS 84 (Seattle zoning map), or EPSG:4269 - NAD83 (Census) ?
From USER:100000 -  * Generated CRS (+proj=lcc +lat_1=47.5 +lat_2=48.73333333333333 +lat_0=47 +lon_0=-120.8333333333333 +x_0=500000.0000000001 +y_0=0 +ellps=GRS80 +towgs84=0,0,0,0,0,0,0 +units=us-ft +no_defs)

What happens during conversion to geojson with no parameters, does it do the right thing with coordinates?  No it doesn't, also it is huge.

  ogr2ogr -f "GeoJSON" kc_parcels.json ../parcel_address.shp parcel_address


Prop 1 vs. parcel size would be interesting.


King County Voting Districts/Precincts
======================================

https://data.kingcounty.gov/Places-Boundaries/Voting-Districts-of-King-County/4eex-7357

These have shape_areas, presumably these are square meters?

Problems with ipython crashing when trying to get points- Ipython dies with no error, but trying to duplicate in regular python leads to::

  >>> geom= feat.GetGeometryRef()
  >>> geom
  <osgeo.ogr.Geometry; proxy of <Swig Object of type 'OGRGeometryShadow *' at 0x7fc5103c2e10> >
  >>> pts = geom.GetPoints()
  ERROR 6: Incompatible geometry for operation

So far I've discovered some geoms like in the street network can directly provide points with GetPoints(), while others in the census and voting district shape files require::
 
  >>> ch = geom.ConvexHull()
  >>> bd = ch.GetBoundary()
  >>> pts = bd.GetPoints()
  >>> pts
  [(1347198.0200866014, 257822.7410414368), (1347169.633004278, 257894.8399786055), (1347151.2829753608, 257941.446840778),...

Unfortunately this is just the points of the convex hull, which worked okay for rectangular census blocks but not complex voting districts.  So skip the convex hull part, and do bd = geom.GetBoundary- this works.

What are units of precinct boundaries?  They aren't lat/long- it's feet with reference to 'harn 1983' etc.

Precinct Graph
--------------

Find shared edges between precincts and make a graph connecting them all.  Find permutations of precincts that would result in >50% approval, but don't break the graph.  Designate one downtown precinct to be the center and make sure remaining precincts connect to it.
